DOCS-527: system.query_log (#11197)
ClickHouse/ClickHouse: docs/en/operations/system-tables.md

-   `source_file` (LowCardinality(String)) — Source file from which the logging was done.
-   `source_line` (UInt64) — Source line from which the logging was done.

## system.query_log {#system_tables-query_log}

Contains information about executed queries, for example, start time, duration of processing, error messages.

!!! note "Note"
    The table doesn’t contain input data for `INSERT` queries.

> To log queries you need to:

Reviewer: this won't be necessary after #11184

1. Configure [query_log](server-configuration-parameters/settings.md#server_configuration_parameters-query-log) server parameters.
2. Set [log_queries](settings/settings.md#settings-log-queries) to 1.

!!! note "Note"

>     The storage period for logs is unlimited. Logs aren’t automatically deleted from the table. You need to organize the removal of outdated logs yourself.

Reviewer: needs a link to TTL docs and an example on how to apply it to the query log

You can specify an arbitrary partitioning key for the `system.query_log` table in the [query\_log](server-configuration-parameters/settings.md#server_configuration_parameters-query-log) server setting (see the `partition_by` parameter).

> By default, logs are added into the table with interval of 7.5 seconds. You can change this interval in the `flush_interval_milliseconds` parameter of the [query_log](server-configuration-parameters/settings.md#server_configuration_parameters-query-log) server settings section. To force flushing logs, use the [SYSTEM FLUSH LOGS](../sql-reference/statements/system.md#query_language-system-flush_logs) query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, information about queries is flushed to the table each 7.5 seconds. You can change this interval in the `flush_interval_milliseconds` parameter of the [query_log](server-configuration-parameters/settings.md#server_configuration_parameters-query-log) server settings section. To force flushing logs, use the [SYSTEM FLUSH LOGS](../sql-reference/statements/system.md#query_language-system-flush_logs) query.
```

> If you delete the table manually from storage, ClickHouse server recreates it on the fly. All the previous logs are deleted with the table files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you delete the `query_log` table manually from storage, the ClickHouse server recreates it on the fly. All the previous logs are deleted with the table files.
```

The `system.query_log` table registers two kinds of queries:

1.  Initial queries that were run directly by the client.
2.  Child queries that were initiated by other queries (for distributed query execution). For these types of queries, information about the parent queries is shown in the `initial_*` columns.

> Each query creates one or two rows in the `query_log` table, depending on the status of the query:

Reviewer: needs to be moved lower, after the `type` is already explained

> 1.  If the query execution was successful, two events with types 1 and 2 are created (see the `type` column).

Reviewer: let's use human-readable names for type, instead of numeric ids

2.  If an error occurred during query processing, two events with types 1 and 4 are created.
3.  If an error occurred before launching the query, a single event with type 3 is created.

Columns:

-   `type` ([Enum8](../sql-reference/data-types/enum.md)) — Type of an event that occurred when executing the query. Values:
    -   `'QueryStart' = 1` — Successful start of query execution.
    -   `'QueryFinish' = 2` — Successful end of query execution.
    -   `'ExceptionBeforeStart' = 3` — Exception before the start of query execution.
    -   `'ExceptionWhileProcessing' = 4` — Exception during the query execution.
-   `event_date` ([Date](../sql-reference/data-types/date.md)) — Query starting date.
-   `event_time` ([DateTime](../sql-reference/data-types/datetime.md)) — Query starting time.
-   `query_start_time` ([DateTime](../sql-reference/data-types/datetime.md)) — Start time of query execution.

> -   `query_duration_ms` ([UInt64](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md#uint-ranges)) — Duration of query execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `query_duration_ms` ([UInt64](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md#uint-ranges)) — Duration of query execution in milliseconds.
```

-   `read_rows` ([UInt64](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md#uint-ranges)) — Number of read rows.

> -   `read_bytes` ([UInt64](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md#uint-ranges)) — Number of read bytes.

Reviewer: * read from where?
* needs some clarification on how various caches are accounted (page cached, uncompressed block cache)

Reviewer 2: > read from where

It is a total number or rows read from all tables and table functions participated in query. It includes usual subqueries, subqueries for `IN` and `JOIN`. 
For remote tables it includes the total number of rows read in all replicas. It is not just the number of rows received form each replica - each replica sends it's own `read_rows` and `read_bytes` value, they are summed up.

Reviewer 2: Caches does not affect this numbers.

-   `written_rows` ([UInt64](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md#uint-ranges)) — For `INSERT` queries, the number of written rows. For other queries, the column value is 0.
-   `written_bytes` ([UInt64](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md#uint-ranges)) — For `INSERT` queries, the number of written bytes. For other queries, the column value is 0.
-   `result_rows` ([UInt64](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md#uint-ranges)) — Number of rows in the result.

> -   `result_bytes` ([UInt64](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md#uint-ranges)) — Number of bytes in the result.

Reviewer: needs some clarification on how the result bytes are calculated, at least whether it's affected by the chosen output format

Reviewer 2: It is the number of rows we have in a query result for select query, or the number of rows we insert into table for insert query.
It is not affected by any output format.
The `result_bytes` represents the total amount of bytes needed to store query result in RAM.

-   `memory_usage` ([UInt64](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md#uint-ranges)) — Memory consumption by the query.
-   `query` ([String](../sql-reference/data-types/string.md)) — Query string.
-   `exception` ([String](../sql-reference/data-types/string.md)) — Exception message.
-   `exception_code` ([Int32](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md)) — Code of an exception. 

> -   `stack_trace` ([String](../sql-reference/data-types/string.md)) — Stack trace (a list of methods called before the error occurred). An empty string, if the query is completed successfully.

Reviewer: * the clarification in round brackets is not really completely correct, let's just link to Wikipedia
* also needs some explanation on the format of this string
* is -> was

Reviewer 2: I suppose format is not very important. It just a string containing the same stacktrace as you can find in server logs.

-   `is_initial_query` ([UInt8](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md)) — Query type. Possible values:
    -   1 — Query was initiated by the client.

>     -   0 — Query was initiated by another query for distributed query execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   0 — Query was initiated by another query as part of distributed query execution.
```

-   `user` ([String](../sql-reference/data-types/string.md)) — Name of the user who initiated the current query.
-   `query_id` ([String](../sql-reference/data-types/string.md)) — ID of the query.
-   `address` ([IPv6](../sql-reference/data-types/domains/ipv6.md)) — IP address that was used to make the query.
-   `port` ([UInt16](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md)) — The client port that was used to make the query.
-   `initial_user` ([String](../sql-reference/data-types/string.md)) — Name of the user who ran the initial query (for distributed query execution).
-   `initial_query_id` ([String](../sql-reference/data-types/string.md)) — ID of the initial query (for distributed query execution).
-   `initial_address` ([IPv6](../sql-reference/data-types/domains/ipv6.md)) — IP address that the parent query was launched from.
-   `initial_port` ([UInt16](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md)) — The client port that was used to make the parent query.
-   `interface` ([UInt8](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md)) — Interface that the query was initiated from. Possible values:
    -   1 — TCP.
    -   2 — HTTP.

> -   `os_user` ([String](../sql-reference/data-types/string.md)) — OS’s username who runs [clickhouse-client](../interfaces/cli.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `os_user` ([String](../sql-reference/data-types/string.md)) — Operating system username who runs [clickhouse-client](../interfaces/cli.md).
```
